Maternal Mortality in the Rural United States

Hannah Sacco
Excelsior University
IND 101: Cornerstone A: Foundations
Mrs. Valerie Meisner
February 26, 2023 
Maternal Mortality in the Rural United States
Imagine the likelihood of dying during pregnancy and childbirth being over one and a half times higher, simply because of where you live. This is the startling reality for millions of women living in rural areas of the United States. From 2011 to 2016, the maternal mortality ratio in the United States’ largest urban counties was 14.6 deaths per 100,000 live births, compared to 23.8 deaths per 100,000 live births in the smallest rural counties. While the national maternal mortality rate has been on the rise in recent years, this appears to be disproportionately true for rural areas (Government Accountability Office, 2021). Further light must be shed on the circumstances surrounding these unnecessary deaths. What appears to be the cause of the inflated maternal mortality rate in rural populations? Rural maternal mortality rates are rising in the United States because of lack of access to obstetrical care, decreased care for comorbid conditions, and decreased proximity to definitive care.
Rural areas of the United States have a well-documented lack of access to obstetrical care. The recommended safe distance to live from an obstetrical unit when considering the needs of a patient during possible childbirth or emergency care is 30 miles. Approximately 35% of women of child-bearing age live farther than this from an obstetrical unit (Hung et al., 2018). Shockingly, almost half of rural counties in the United States lacked obstetrical services between 2004 and 2014. To make matters worse, an additional 9% of rural counties lost their obstetrical services entirely during this same time period (Hung et al., 2017). While it might seem that basic obstetric care can be provided at any facility, lacking units and staff that are highly trained in maternal and fetal care has significant negative effects on patients. When compared to urban areas, the facilities that are available in rural areas have less perinatal patient encounters, meaning these encounters result in a higher rate of maternal morbidity (Hung et al., 2018).  According to the Government Accountability Office (2021), higher rates of severe maternal morbidity and mortality have been linked to a lack of prenatal care, treatment at facilities that lack obstetrical services, and an absence of practicing obstetrician-gynecologists (OBGYNs) in an area. Without access to basic prenatal and perinatal care, these patients are put at higher risk for complications, which in turn leads to a higher rural maternal mortality rate.
To complicate the lack of obstetrical care, populations in rural areas suffer from decreased care for comorbid conditions. One of the leading causes of maternal mortality in the United States is cardiovascular conditions, accounting for about 26% of maternal deaths. This category includes all cardiac related conditions except cardiomyopathy and stroke, which are reported separately (Government Accountability Office, 2020). Patients who have preexisting cardiovascular conditions can experience exacerbation of these conditions during pregnancy, leading to an increased risk of mortality. These patients require increased coordination of care between their OBGYNs and cardiologists (Brickner, 2018). Access to diverse types of care and healthcare resources, such as specialists, is limited in rural areas (Kroelinger et al., 2021). This means that patients requiring increased coordination of care between their physicians might not even have a cardiologist to begin with. Long-term uncontrolled comorbid conditions, such as those seen where there is a lack of preventative services available, increase the risk of severe maternal morbidity and mortality (Government Accountability Office, 2021). Many conditions that cause minor to moderate health problems normally, such as hypertension or diabetes, can be exacerbated during pregnancy. Access to basic healthcare, not just obstetrical care, is necessary for women in rural areas throughout their lifetimes. Without proper care for these comorbid conditions before, during, and after pregnancy, these patients are at a higher risk for complications.
Along the same lines, mothers in rural areas have decreased proximity to definitive care for conditions that increase their mortality rates. Critical care obstetrics (CCO) is defined as the highest level of specialized care that can be provided for obstetrical patients. It is in a facility that is appropriately equipped for high-risk patients, and includes capabilities of intensive monitoring, diagnostic imaging, and medical interventions – including surgery. In the most rural areas of the United States, over 20% of women are located more than 50 miles from the closest CCO services. In Wyoming, there are no CCO facilities available. Because the distance to an appropriate care facility is so far, serious complications before, during, and after childbirth are treated at hospitals that are not equipped to handle these conditions (Kroelinger et al., 2021). Facilities that are not equipped to treat these patients must weigh the pros and cons of patient treatment to decide the best course of action for a serious patient. Transfer to CCO facilities is often not an option due to the critical nature of the patient, so treatment at rural facilities is necessary. Being underequipped to handle these serious situations increases the risk of complications and mortality for these patients.
Some will try to implicate lack of insurance, poverty, and ethnicity as the major causes of rural maternal mortality. There is evidence that socioeconomic factors, such as insurance status and income level, have a correlation with increased maternal mortality rates. These factors limit access to resources and routine medical care before, during, and after pregnancy. Certain ethnicities also show higher maternal mortality rates than other ethnicities. Between 2016 and 2018, the mortality ratio for African Americans and American Indians in rural areas was 59.3 and 37.5 deaths per 100,000 live births, respectively, compared to a ratio of 19.7 deaths per 100,000 live births in Whites (Government Accountability Office, 2021). While we should not minimize the effects of living in poverty, being underinsured, or being a minority race, such as African American, these do not seem to be the major contributing factors to maternal mortality. The rural counties that have higher populations of these demographics are the counties that are most likely to lack or lose accessibility to obstetric services. While these populations were disadvantaged to begin with, the closure of rural obstetrics facilities escalates the situation (Hung et al., 2017). The real problem is lack of access that is created by many contributing factors in society.
Research shows an elevated maternal mortality rate in the United States that must be dealt with. Many of these unnecessary deaths are occurring in rural areas. These elevated levels of rural deaths are because of lack of access to obstetrical care, care for comorbid conditions, and definitive care within a reasonable distance. Many maternal deaths in the United States are from preventable causes and can be avoided if proper treatment is provided in a timely manner. It has been suggested that increasing availability of public transportation in rural areas in the future will lessen the effects of increased distances to appropriate obstetrics facilities. Some states, such as California, have already initiated ways to combat the elevated mortality levels. These include algorithms to follow in emergency situations and obstetric crash carts in every facility. These ideas are being disseminated throughout the United States, but not as quickly as they should be. We have a responsibility to enact changes that will provide more accessible treatment for every woman of child-bearing age – regardless of their location – to avoid more senseless deaths.
 
References
Brickner, B. (2018). Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in pregnancy: Management challenges in pregnancies complicated by maternal heart disease are complex, requiring ongoing involvement of a team of specialists. Contemporary OB/GYN, 63(1), 12-20. http://vlib.excelsior.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=rzh&AN=127421387&site=eds-live&scope=site
Government Accountability Office. (2020). Maternal mortality: Trends in pregnancy-related deaths and federal efforts to reduce them (GAO-20-248). http://vlib.excelsior.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=mth&AN=142629048&site=eds-live&scope=site
Government Accountability Office. (2021). Maternal morbidity and mortality: Additional efforts needed to assess program data for rural and underserved areas (GAO-21-283). http://vlib.excelsior.edu/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ulh&AN=150243605&site=eds-live&scope=site
Hung, P., Casey, M. M., Kozhimannil, K. B., Karaca-Mandic, & P., Moscovice, I. S. (2018). Rural-urban differences in access to hospital obstetric and neonatal care: How far is the closest one?. Journal of Perinatology, 38(6), 645-652. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41372-018-0063-5
Hung, P., Henning-Smith, C. E., Casey, M. M., & Kozhimannil, K. B. (2017). Access to obstetric services in rural counties still declining, with 9 percent losing services, 2004–14. Health Affairs, 36(9), 1663-1671. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2017.03H38
Kroelinger, C. D., Brantley, M. D., Fuller, T.R., Okoroh, E. M., Monsour, M. J., Cox, S., & Barfield, W. D. (2021). Geographic access to critical care obstetrics for women of reproductive age by race and ethnicity. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 224(3), 304.e1-304.e11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajog.2020.08.042
